---
layout: post
tags: Posadist Fascism Sartre Marcuse Marx Hegel Paxton Griffin
title: "Meta-analysis on the study of fascism"
categories: other
author:
- Posadist
---

# Table of contents

1. [Introduction](#first)
2. [Vulgarity in the Marxist analysis of fascism](#second)
3. [Strategies for studying fascism](#third)
4. [The philosophical underpinning of fascist ideology](#fourth)
6. [Open questions](#sixth)
6. [Bibliography](#seventh)
7. [Acknowledgements](#eighth)

### <span style="color:#f05454">Introduction</span> <a name="first"></a>

This post is structured as an incomplete collection of thoughts, an intermediate note for facilitating an ongoing investigation into fascism: its essential characteristics, defining qualities, historical and modern manifestations, its dual character as both philosophy and political ideology, and so on. It seems appropriate to begin the investigation with a meta-analysis of the strategies commonly utilized in this kind of study. The meta-questions we’re concerned with right now do not really require any knowledge about fascism, which I suppose makes it a good starting point for the forthcoming work.

We are motivated by an important question: **what is fascism and how do we fight it?** Our task in confronting this problem is more difficult than was Trotsky’s when his manuscript of the same name was published in 1944, in the sense that almost 80 years has presented us with a plethora of new political and ideological manifestations of fascism all over the world. On the other hand, our task is made easier by the fact that we can engage with 80 years’ worth of extensive and thoughtful research on the subject of fascism. Thus, what we want to do is take the mountain of research available to us (or more realistically, some tiny fraction of it) and use it to investigate the aforementioned problem; some classical references that we can call upon include:

- *The Struggle Against Fascism* - Clara Zetkin (1923)
- *Democracy and Fascism* - Antonio Gramsci (1924)
- *Fascism: What it is and how to fight it* - Leon Trotsky (1944)
- *The Authoritarian Personality* - Theodor Adorno, et. al (1950)
- *Freudian Theory and the Pattern of Fascist Propaganda* - Theodor Adorno, (1951)
- *Marxists in the Face of Fascism: Writings by Marxists on Fascism from the Interwar Period* (David Beetham's broad collection of Marxist and socialist writings on fascism from 1921-1938)

As well as some of the more recent work, which will undoubtedly build upon older research:

* *The Nature of Fascism* - Robert Griffin (1993)
* *Ur-Fascism* - Umberto Eco (1995)
* *A History of Fascism, 1914-1945* - Stanley Payne (1995)
* *The Anatomy of Fascism* - Robert Paxton (2004)
* *The Civic Foundations of Fascism in Europe* - Riley (2010)
* *How Fascism Works: The Politics of Us and Them* - Jason Stanley (2018)

Is the aforementioned motivating question really even a question worth investigating today? With the great depth of research available to us, surely the Left has definitively ascertained the essence of fascism and the best means of confronting it; after all, this is a problem with very grave theoretical and practical consequences for the socialist project. The Marxists are all certainly familiar with the Fifth Comintern Congress’ resolution of July 1924, describing fascism as “one of the classic forms of the counter-revolution in the epoch of capitalist decay,” in particular an epoch where “through lack of revolutionary experience and a leading class party,” the proletariat “has been unable to organise the revolutionary struggle.” Moreover, the Comintern has already determined long ago that

> Fascism is the instrument of the big bourgeoisie for fighting the proletariat, when the legal means available to the state have proved insufficient to subdue them. It is the extra-legal arm of the big bourgeoisie for establishing and consolidating its dictatorship. But in its social structure fascism is a petty-bourgeois movement. *(Beetham 1983)*

Dimitrov famously summarizes this assessment as follows: “Fascism is the open, terroristic dictatorship of the most reactionary, most chauvinist and most imperialist elements of finance capital.” Lest we too quickly content ourselves with the convictions of decades-old literature, I will first point to some natural questions which suggest the theoretical importance of re-examining fascism, and in the next section I will briefly discuss one example which alludes to the Left's inadequate understanding of fascism.

Our ultimate goal in the multi-part investigation (which this intermediate note seeks to supplement and motivate) will be to understand fascism as a totality, both a political project and philosophical project, as deeply and as thoroughly as we can, given the natural constraints afforded by the sheer complexity of the problem. The following outline may shed light upon some of these complexities:

* What is the connection between fascist movement and fascist demagogue? cf Paxton
* How do we incorporate and interweave all of the varying levels of specificity involved in a thorough investigation of fascism, and compare with modern political forms today? cf Paxton
* Just what parts of the fascist experience should we study in order to ascertain its essential elements? Its origins? Its growth? Its behavior once in power? What parts of the fascist experience expose most clearly the nature of this complex phenomenon?
* Fascism manifests in myriad distinct ways depending on the various historical, economic, and social conditions in which it takes root; many different countries have grappled with fascism in a diversity of circumstances – how do we draw a common thread between each of these manifestations of fascist politics?
* The fascist philosophy, originating in 20th century Italian adaptations of German idealism, is restructured and transformed on the basis of these varying conditions – how do we draw a common thread between each of these manifestations of fascist philosophy? 
* How does the fascist philosophy clarify the fascist practice, and vice versa?
* In the event that a totality is established, unifying all preceding manifestations of fascism, how can we be so sure that the aspects of this totality will remain as the defining set of characteristics for any future manifestation of fascism?
* Does it even make sense to talk about “future manifestations” of fascism, or is fascism forever caught in a particular historical moment?

Apparently, there is an endless plethora of questions which seem to lead only to deeper questions. Hopefully this brief exposition helps to elucidate the huge scope of the problem at hand. 

### <span style="color:#f05454">Vulgarity in the Marxist analysis of fascism </span><a name="second"></a>

In Marxists in the Face of Fascism, David Beetham notes that in the years following 1928, partially due to an inflexibility arising from confinement to “the straightjacket of Stalinist orthodoxy,” Marxist theory became increasingly unable to assess the fascist threat and the appropriate means of addressing it. “To estimate the danger from the Nazis correctly,” Beetham says, necessitated “not only an adequate understanding of fascism in its Italian form, but the flexibility to identify and anticipate its course of development in different surroundings.” We might wonder, then, to what extent have contemporary Marxists taken on Beetham’s challenge; i.e. the challenge to develop a theoretical line powerful enough to identify and anticipate the course of development of various fascist movements around the world.

On November 17, 2016, the International Marxist Tendency (IMT) published an article entitled “Fascism in America? Fight Racism with Socialism!” where they argue that "the social basis for fascism as such no longer exists, and a period of outright reaction is not in the cards for the foreseeable future.” Despite this proclamation, it would take only four years for the American far-right to storm the Capitol en masse, bearing an assortment of Nazi symbols and flags. The IMT argues that if there was a social basis for fascism, then “armed gangs supported by the police would have cleared the streets, lynch mobs would have smashed up immigrant shops and trade union offices,” and “the bodies of murdered labor leaders and lefties would be piled in the morgues …”

In other words, the IMT says, if fascism posed any threat then we would already be dead. It seems that whatever class analysis underpinning this explanation has led to a materialist dialectic so weak that it lacks any power to actually identify fascism before it's too late! I’d say we ought to be a little bit more optimistic with our investigation; surely we can arrive at an understanding of fascism which is nuanced enough to identify the seeds of fascism before armed gangs and lynch mobs take to the streets.

Indeed, the IMT authors write, “Reaction is one thing. But fascist reaction is another altogether” and “to imply that the large crowds at Trump rallies constitute the embryo of fascism is to misunderstand the social basis of fascist reaction, overestimate the strength of reaction, and underestimate the objective strength of workers.” Whereas Trotsky warns against underestimating “the full sweep of the fascist danger,” the IMT warns against “overestimating the strength of reaction”!

So what is the IMT’s conception of “the social basis of fascist reaction,” and what is the justification for the IMT’s claim that the U.S. currently lacks “the social basis for fascism”? In an article published on January 28, 2016 entitled “What Trump is and how to fight him” the IMT elaborates that "Fascism ... is a mass phenomenon based on the ruined and enraged petty bourgeoisie, the lumpenproletariat, and the most backward layers of the workers." Similarly, in their article “What is Fascism? And is it an imminent threat today?” the IMT describes fascism as “a mass movement of reaction, based upon a frenzied middle class and what Marx called the lumpenproletariat, the most ground-down, disorganised and backward elements of the working class …” 

This balance of class forces is much unlike the current situation of the U.S. today, they say, because “despite the numerical decline of the unions over the last few decades, organized labor remains a mighty and decisive potential force … The unions have not been illegalized, dismantled, or cowed by violence.” The IMT therefore concludes that “The balance of class forces today – where the peasantry, small shopkeepers and petit-bourgeois in general, have been reduced to a minority in society – do not permit for the creation of a mass fascist force capable of destroying the organizations of the working class.”

These are very strong statements that deserve closer examination. We might first note that the rights and powers of unions in the U.S. were systematically restricted throughout the 20th century, and this trend has only continued into the 21st century. The number of major strikes and lockouts in the U.S. fell by 97% from 381 in 1970 to 187 in 1980 to only 11 in 2010. This is not to say that organized labor lacks the potential to be a “mighty and decisive force,” but one might wonder what “dismantling” unions looks like, if not (as Howard Zinn details) the Department of Justice carrying out extensive raids of unions all over the country, arresting hundreds of IWW leaders, beating down strikes by force, and producing the weakest union presence in the history of the country.

Furthermore, the claim that 'the social basis for fascism in the U.S. is negated by the proletariat’s strength' ignores the fact that Germany possessed the most strongly organised working class in Europe when the National Socialists seized power. The implication that we need not be worried about fascist reaction because the unions have yet to be dismantled ignores the fact that the disabling of working-class organisations in Germany was undertaken *after* and *not before* the Nazi seizure of power.

Moreover, we ought to examine the IMT's claim that the balance of class forces today is such that “the petit-bourgeois in general have been reduced to a minority in society.” This statement is of crucial importance because, as indicated above, they maintain (alongside the Fifth Comintern Congress) that a necessary precondition for the fascist movement is a large section of disillusioned petite-bourgeoisie which can be weaponized against the working class; as Trotsky says, “It may be said that fascism is the act of placing the petty bourgeoisie at the disposal of its most bitter enemies.”

It is true that the peasantry and the group of small shopkeepers has been steadily shrinking since mercantile capitalism began industrialization, and that as a result this group comprises a very small minority in the U.S. today. However, the material conditions and social relations in our advanced industrialized capitalist society are vastly different from those that Trotsky, Lenin, and Marx observed; consequently, the demographic composition of the working class is likely also vastly different. The “petty bourgeoisie” might have looked like small shopkeepers, small business owners, and merchants at the time, but what does the “petty bourgeoisie” look like today? In other words, what class formation today exhibits the same or similar relations to the means of production as the traditional petty bourgeoisie? It is telling that the IMT does not even attempt to engage these questions.

This is not really the appropriate place for a deep study of the modern structure of the petty bourgeois class formation, but it should suffice to note that these questions do not have such cut-and-dry answers as the IMT makes it seem – these questions are the subject of intense debate within a very wide body of literature, such as Nicos Poulantzas’ extensive work *Classes in Contemporary Capitalism* and the subsequent reviews by Andor Skotnes which provide a rich discussion of the intricacies. In addition, even if we accept the IMT’s characterization of the American petty bourgeoisie and its connection to fascism, there are still a number of unanswered questions about this connection; as Beetham notes,

> The identification of fascism as a mass movement of the middle strata raised at once a central problem of analysis. How could it also be the 'organic expression' of large scale property? What was the relationship between the mobilisation of the petty bourgeoisie and the large financial, industrial and landed interests that this mobilisation reputedly served?

Given these weaknesses, we should not be satisfied with the argument put forward by the IMT to discount the threat of fascism in the U.S. If their analysis is indeed wrong, then it is in fact dangerously wrong, because it leaves us woefully ill-prepared to deal with the existential threat posed by fascism. We cannot yet pass judgment on their characterization of fascism, but the preceding remarks should at least leave one with serious doubts about the firmness and solidity of the Left’s theoretical conception of fascism.

### <span style="color:#f05454">Strategies for studying fascism</span><a name="third"></a>

There are a number of common analytical strategies employed in the literature on fascism. Ultimately, the answer to the question “What is fascism?” lies within the analytical strategy itself. The words written, the actions, policies, and goals undertaken by fascists are *objective historical facts*, and strictly speaking the conclusion one arrives at does not depend upon these facts themselves – rather upon the interpretive schema utilized by the investigator in taking into account all of the facts. Thus, it is absolutely crucial that we should choose the appropriate strategy.

* **Some scholars deny that the term fascism has any useful meaning at all and that it must be discarded.** Correspondingly, every manifestation of what is commonly termed “fascism” must be studied as its own discrete phenomena, completely disparate from the other manifestations. Notably, Sternhell and Bracher believe that “a general theory that seeks to combine fascism and Nazism … is not possible,” one reason being the centrality of biological racism to the National Socialism of Germany and its relative lack of primacy in Italian fascism.

We reject this strategy: to the extent that the term “fascism” has lost its meaning and poignancy, it must be rescued from imprecise usage and reconstituted as a purposeful descriptive, capable of drawing together common threads among temporally and spatially disparate political movements. Socialists do not typically believe that the term “socialism” be discarded simply because it is difficult to define in a way that adequately captures every nuance of its historical contingency, instead they insist that the term be clarified, and utilized as precisely as possible in order to retain its full theoretical force. 

We are in agreement with Paxton when he says that, "We need a generic term for what is a general phenomenon, indeed the most important political novelty of the twentieth century: a popular movement against the Left and against liberal individualism.” Against Sternhell and Bracher, Paxton (2004) argues that "all fascisms mobilize against some enemy, internal as well as external, but that the national culture provides the identity of that enemy” – thus salvaging the general phenomena from their critique.

* **Another strategy is to construct an encyclopedic survey of the many forms of fascism**, classifying each by its external appearances, noting the many commonalities as well as the many differences and varieties, and avoiding altogether the problem of defining the "essence" of fascism. Notable in this vein is Payne’s *A History of Fascism, 1914-1945.*

* **A third approach constructs an "ideal type" that fits no case perfectly, but lets us posit a kind of composite "essence" of fascism**, allowing us to measure each manifestation according to this guideline, and thereby fixing a common ground for comparative analysis, etc. For example, in his book *The Nature of Fascism,* British scholar Roger Griffin proposes the following definition: "Fascism is a genus of political ideology whose mythic core in its various permutations is a palingenetic form of populist ultranationalism." 

We reject both of these strategies for the reason that they seem to condemn us to a static view, looking at fascism or its manifestations in isolation. Instead, perhaps we should, as Paxton suggests, "watch fascism in action, from its beginnings to its final cataclysm, within the complex web of interaction it forms with society." In order to clarify this suggestion, we will refer to the historical materialist method utilized by Marx, Engels, Lenin, Mao, Sartre, etc.

Consider Sartre's characterization of an historical inquiry as "the search for the synthetic ensemble," in which "each fact, once established, is questioned and interpreted as part of a whole…" How do we question and assess the *fact* of fascist "palingenetic ultranationalism," or the *fact* of its essence being constituted in its "mythic core," if these facts are placed, isolated and static, ahead of the historical investigation? Some of these qualities may seem self-evident: certainly no historian has ever questioned the nationalistic character of fascism, for example, but Griffin spends several pages at the beginning of his book explaining the precise details of this terminology. How can these details be questioned if they are established in an a priori manner at the outset? 

Certainly the truth of the fascist essence lies primarily not in its definition, but rather arises organically through the investigation of its historical process. As Paxton points out, 

> Definitions are inherently limiting. They frame a static picture of something that is better perceived in movement, and they portray as “frozen ‘statuary’" something that is better understood as a process ... The quest for the perfect definition, by reducing fascism to one ever more finely honed phrase, seems to shut off questions about the origins and course of fascist development rather than open them up.

In placing the essence of the object of examination before the study of its history in motion, one is forced to examine the historical trajectory in terms of this fixed essence; speaking for both Existentialists and Marxists, Sartre explains that

> For us, truth is something which becomes, it has and will have become ... It is a totalization which is forever being totalized. Particular facts do not signify anything; they are neither true nor false so long as they are not related, through the mediation of various partial totalities, to the totalization in process.

It may be the case, as Griffin argues, that fascism is distinguished by its core myth of national rebirth, "the mythical horizons of the fascist mentality" which seeks "to inaugurate an exciting new world in place of the played-out one that existed before"; however, in pursuing this elaboration, by proceeding to name various qualities or aspects of this or that political movement which might link it to this essence, we find ourselves only in the presence of Platonic ideas: on the one side, the protesting victims of rapid industrialization and the losers of globalization proceed directly to their identification with the fascist movement's call for the abolition of modern decadence, giving way to that entity of the "fascist myth of renewal"; on the other side, we find the urge to rearm and wage expansive war which quickly sweeps aside the promises of the mythologized golden past, subjecting the population to the most technologically advanced mechanisms of social control – now the fascist movement disappears behind that other entity, "the ultranationalist regime," turning the crucial contradiction into a predictable consequence. Sartre calls these entities "general particularities," for they are made to pass for particular, historical realities when we would rather not see in them anything more than the purely formal unity of abstract, universal relations.

Thus, abandoning the interpretive heuristics of dialectical materialism, we are left with the "already totalized knowledge" of isolated facts, and facts located between predetermined interrelations. Specificities are substituted for generalities, making them into fetishes, placing the conclusions before the investigation, and ultimately finding in each component of the analysis only what we put there initially. We have "denatured" the facts, or as Sartre says, "[invented] a nature for them in order to discover it later underneath them, as their substance ..." Instead of taking this approach, Paxton explains,

> It is only in following the entire fascist itinerary that we can resolve the ambiguous relationship between fascism and modernity ... The solution is best found not in setting up binary opposites but in following the relationship between modernity and fascism through its complex historical course.

Interpreting this idea more broadly: only by following the entire fascist itinerary can we resolve any of the ambiguities between fascist ideology, rhetoric and practice: the answer "has to be developed in the unfolding story of fascism’s acquisition and exercise of power." Thus, in general we should try to follow the relationship between the opposing aspects of fascism, tracing out the evolution of their opposition through the complex historical course followed by fascist ideology. In Sartrean language, we should utilize “living Marxism” to approach history with the understanding that “facts are never isolated appearances, that if they come into being together, it is always within the higher unity of a whole, that they are bound to each other by internal relations, and that the presence of one profoundly modifies the nature of the other …”

We should be clear that our issue with this method of studying fascism does not lie in the usage of the Weberian "ideal type". In fact, we might consider ideal types generally unavoidable for practically any discussion about abstract ideas – when Marxists talk about "capitalism" in the abstract they are really referring to an ideal typification of society which unites private ownership, generalized commodity production, wage labor, etc., when Marxists advocate for the overthrow of the capitalist mode of production and for the socialist transformation of society, they are of course referring to an ideal typification of society which unites the abolition of private property, the democratic reorganization of the productive forces, etc. Ideal types cannot be avoided, but they should be constructed in the process of the investigation, not as a substitute for it.

There is another important aspect about this third approach which ought to be discussed. A thorough study of fascism should clarify the relation between the individual fascist and the fascist movement: often the signs of fascism reveal themselves in the demagogue or the orator, the particularities of the fascist ideology are molded by the whims of the fascist dictator, and moreover as Paxton explains, "The excesses of fascism in power also required wide complicity among members of the establishment: magistrates, police officials, army officers, businessmen." Therefore, he says, "To understand fully how fascist regimes worked, we must dig down to the level of ordinary people and examine the banal choices they made in their daily routines."

Griffin also accepts this to some extent when he writes that "ideology is simultaneously individual and supra-individual, depending on how it is being investigated. It exists at the point of conjuncture where individual consciousness, intention and rationalization of behaviour interact with the external ‘supra-personal’ forces which condition human existence." If we acknowledge the importance of synthesizing individual and collective aspects of fascism in the study of its essence, then our chosen method must be well-equipped to accommodate our investigation in this regard.

According to Sartre, the historical materialist method we've outlined above (for Sartre, also an existentialist method) "intends, without being unfaithful to Marxist principles, to find mediations which allow the individual concrete – the particular life, the real and dated conflict, the person – to emerge from the background of the general contradictions of productive forces and relations of production." Thus, confronted with the dual enemies of mechanistic materialism and Hegelian idealism, in our historical analysis we must "restore to the individual man his power to go beyond his situation by means of work and action." Here we once again discover synergy with Paxton's method which seeks to "explore the interaction between Leader and Nation, and between Party and civil society."

* There is another common trend in the modern literature on fascism (notably Stanley’s *How Fascism Works: The Politics of Us and Them)* to proceed along the following lines:
  1. The (usually not explicitly verbalized) formation of some preconceived idea about which modern politicians and political movements represent a revival of fascism, e.g. Trump, Modi, Bolsonaro, Netanyahu, etc.
  2. The identification of commonalities between these modern political forms and classical forms of fascism, e.g. common rhetorical, social or psychological pathologies.
  3. The *definition* of fascism according to these commonalities, as an ad hoc justification for the conclusion that the aforementioned modern political forms truly represent a revival or continuation of fascism.

Putting aside for the moment the obvious logical problems arising from such a line of analysis, it may very well be the case that the political forms identified in the first step genuinely represent a revival of fascism, or that the commonalities identified in the second step represent crucial, defining characteristics of fascism. Moreover, we should probably not be so quick to disregard a sociological framework which confirms our intuitive understanding of reality (for example, there are some Jewish German-Americans who report, from their personal experience, the harsh similarities between the rhetorical and political techniques of Trump and Hitler). 

I think the last point stumbles upon an interesting technical dilemma that warrants deeper analysis. How do we make use of (otherwise useful) sociological research which begins its analysis at the desired conclusion, when the historical materialist method demands that we begin our analysis with the material conditions having historically paved the way for the fascist project, and only afterwards assess the modern political forms in relation to the framework we construct?

Recalling Sartre’s discussion of a “vulgar Marxism” in *Method* which fails to “grasp the process which produces the person and his product inside a class and within a given society at a given historical moment,” we note the structural symmetry between Sartre’s problem and the one which we have just pointed out. A historical method which fails to grasp the process which produces an individual with fascist characteristics who empowers fascist sections within a given society and under particular socioeconomic conditions, is heuristically inadequate. Following Sartre’s suggestion, we thus hypothesize that some kind of “hierarchy of mediations” could prove useful in dealing with the aforementioned dilemma.

### <span style="color:#f05454">The philosophical underpinning of fascist ideology</span><a name="fourth"></a>

There is another strategy that I initially thought might be appropriate. Suppose we think of fascism as an ideology, a medium through which conscious social actors make sense of their world and in which they live out their relations to the social structures and material conditions with which they are confronted. In this sense, Marxism, liberalism, and conservatism are also ideologies; thus, it would make sense, at least from a naïve perspective, to approach the study of fascism in the same way that we approach the study of other ideologies: by first studying their programs, doctrines, and underlying philosophical premises in order to better understand their actual policies and political implementations. After delving into several of the core philosophical works underlying Italian and German fascism, I realized that this strategy is misguided for a few different reasons.

First of all, as Griffin quite rightly points out in *Nature*, approaching the study of fascism from the direction of political theory tends to “euphemize the nebulous fascist ideals and policies” and divert attention away from the immense human suffering resulting from those ideals and policies becoming “translated into gruesome political realities.” Secondly, many of the other prominent ideologies which inform our political and economic organization of society, such as liberalism, conservatism, and Marxism, rest upon systems laid out in the works of major theorists (for example, Locke, Mill, and Tocqueville in the case of liberalism, Burke of conservatism, and Marx and Engels of Marxism). In each case, one finds a relative degree of homogeneity among most real manifestations of the ideology, at least in terms of the basic premises of the ideology’s underlying philosophy. Fascism, on the other hand, is infamous for its lack of any major theorist comparable to Marx, Locke, or Burke. As Paxton puts it, 

> Fascism does not rest explicitly upon an elaborated philosophical system, but rather upon popular feelings about master races, their unjust lot, and their rightful predominance over inferior peoples.

One can point to the work of Giovanni Gentile, who ghostwrote part of Mussolini’s *The Doctrine of Fascism,* and who wrote extensively on the philosophical premises of fascism in Italy (see, for example, *The Philosophic Basis of Fascism* or *Origins and Doctrine of Fascism* by G. Gentile). One might otherwise point to the philosopher Carl Schmitt, or Alfred Rosenberg as the head of the Nazi Party’s office of cultural policy. However, as we will demonstrate shortly, the philosophies espoused by these Italian and German fascists differ in even their most basic philosophical premises – a difference which can be attributed to the unique socioeconomic and historical conditions with which they were confronted – hence they cannot be reconciled into a coherent “fascist philosophy” comparable to the philosophies of liberalism or Marxism. Of course, this lack of philosophical coherence leads one to wonder how the various political projects typically termed "fascism" can be considered expressions of a common ideology, but we will set this question aside for now.

In his *Lectures on the Philosophy of History*, Hegel extols the “glorious mental dawn” signified by the French Revolution, and exclaims that “not until now had man advanced to the recognition of the principle that Thought ought to govern spiritual reality.” In other words, what men think to be true, right, and good, ought to be realized in the actual organization of their societal and individual life. Yet, in light of the diversity of opinions regarding what constitutes the true, right and good, we are led to ask: how can we develop a common guiding principle for the organization of life? In line with the tradition of Western philosophy, Hegel believes that objective concepts and principles of thought exist which can be used to determine universally valid conditions and norms for the organization of life in accordance with “the true, right and the good”. Hegel calls the totality of these objective concepts and principles “Reason” – a central concept in his philosophy of history.

As Marcuse explains in *Reason and Revolution*, “The life of reason appears in man's continuous struggle to comprehend what exists and to transform it in accordance with the truth comprehended.” Thus, for Hegel reason is a historical force, and the process whereby reason is fulfilled, both temporally and spatially throughout history, signifies the unfolding of the history of mankind. Hegel uses the term ‘mind’ or ‘spirit’ (or *Geist*) to denote this identification between the fulfillment of reason and the unfolding of history; in other words, the Hegelian term ‘mind’ denotes

> the historical world viewed in relation to the rational progress of humanity – the historical world not as a chain of acts and events but as a ceaseless struggle to adapt the world to the growing potentialities of mankind. (Marcuse 1954)

In line with the progressive ideas of Western liberalism, Hegel conceived of the state as the union of the common and the individual interest, and thus as the realization of reason. Idealizing the achievements of the German Reformation and the French Revolution, his political philosophy “was grounded on the assumption that civil society could be kept functioning without renouncing the essential rights and liberties of the individual.” Hence, Hegel’s state was “a rational whole, governed by universally valid laws, calculable and lucid in its operation, professing to protect the essential interests of every individual without discrimination.” (Marcuse 1954)

Now with a basic understanding of Hegel’s conception of the state, we are prepared to examine the crucial disagreement between Italian fascism and German fascism with respect to their orientation towards Hegel’s political philosophy, a disagreement based upon the distinct historical situations and socioeconomic challenges they met in their inauguration.

At its inception, Italian nationalism found itself in opposition to the Catholic Church: Giovanni Gentile notes that "the transcendent conception that rules over the Catholic Church contradicts the immanentist character of the political conception of Fascism.” (Gregor 2002) Moreover, the church regarded the nationalists’ aspirations as detrimental to Vatican interests, “based on the Papacy’s claim that unified Italy had usurped its central Italian possessions, which were seen as the guarantee of the church’s independence in the fulfillment of the universal mission to minister to all Catholics.” (Morgan 2004) Thus, Marcuse says, “The protestant tendencies of German idealism provided efficient weapons for the justification of a secular authority in the struggle with the church.”

Moreover, entering the competitive stage of industrialized global imperialism in 1923, the Italian nation-state had to contend with a number of serious political and socioeconomic problems:

* A middle class split into numerous competing groups: the "urban and rural" middle classes, the "old and new middle classes, mainly living in the north and the centre of the country," and "rising middle classes, connected to modern economic development, especially the growth in the tertiary sector of service and white-collar private and public employment." (Morgan 2004)
* An extremely backward national economy, as evidenced by the difficult obstacles the PNF experienced in organizing southern populations: "getting the PNF off the ground meant confronting problems of physical remoteness, inadequate communications, the general lack of resources and facilities, low school attendance because of agricultural child labour, a lack of tradition or experience of organisation and public activity among peasants, especially for women." (Morgan 2004)

Thus, the primacy that Hegelian idealism afforded to the state (as an crucial vehicle for the development of Geist), and its “congenial demonstration of the state as an independent substance, existing vis-a-vis the petty interests of the middle class” (Marcuse 1954) likely motivated Italy’s ideological turn towards Hegelian idealism, and the generally positive perspective towards Hegel’s philosophy of the state. For example, Marcuse cites Sergio Panunzio, an official theoretician of the PNF who “endorses Hegel’s distinction between state and civil society and with it his remarks on the corporation,” saying that “those writers are right who relate so many aspects of the Fascist State to Hegel’s organic State.” 

Of course, the fascist theorists did not just borrow from Hegel the state’s crucial historical mission but also revised it considerably; for Hegel the state exists as the realization of reason and the rational unification of individual and collective interests, whereas for Gentile and Mussolini we see that unification between individual and collective is accomplished through the total absorption of the individual by state authority. In *The Doctrine of Fascism* they write,

> Anti-individualistic, the Fascist conception of life stresses the importance of the State and accepts the individual only insofar as his interests coincide with those of the State, which stands for the conscience and the universal, will of man as a historic entity ... the State became the expression of the conscience and will of the people.

On the other hand, the National Socialists of Germany did not express such an approving disposition towards Hegel’s philosophy of the state, not even in a revisionist sense. As Marcuse explains,

> In contrast to Italy, the German state had been a powerful and firmly established reality. It was a Rechtsstaat, a comprehensive rational political system with distinctly demarcated and recognized spheres of rights and liberties that could not be utilized by the new authoritarian regime.

Moreover, the obstacles which the early Nazi party faced were not those of underdevelopment, decentralization or lack of advanced bureaucratic and administrative organs. On the contrary, following World War 1, “The inflation of the early ’20s permitted unscrupulous entrepreneurs to build up giant economic empires at the expense of the middle and working classes,” and “foreign loans that flowed into Germany after 1924 gave German industry the liquid capital needed to rationalize and enlarge their plants.” Even the social-welfare program promoted by the powerful Social Democratic party “indirectly strengthened the centralization and concentration of industry, since big business could far more easily assume the burden than the small or middle entrepreneur.” (Neumann 1944)

Thus, Neumann says, "the central problem was the imperialism of German monopoly capital, becoming ever more urgent with the continued growth of the process of monopolization. The more monopoly grew, the more incompatible it became with political democracy." On the other hand, the dominant force of monopoly capital met a powerful opponent in Germany’s robust organization of labor: “Nearly ten million Germans belonged to trade unions of some sort or other in 1924... With a population of some four million less, the number of trade-union members in Germany had more than doubled since the beginning of the war ..” and consequently, “Able to poll but 590,000 votes in a 1920 Reichstag election, the Communists increased their election totals to 3,230,000 in 1928, 4,500,000 in 1930, and 5,980,000 in 1933.” (Brady 1937)

As a result of this antagonism between monopoly capital and organized labor, “the highly rationalized and rapidly expanding industrial apparatus met increasing difficulties of utilization,” (Marcuse 1954); indeed, Brady notes that “German productive capacity as a whole was never employed better than 80 percent during the most active period of the post-war interval; for protracted periods it ranged around 50 to 60 percent…” In order to expand the productive forces, destroy the socialist opposition and accelerate imperialist expansionism, the industrial capitalists needed to destroy the “system of political representation, legal equality, freedom of contracts,” which prevented “the total surrender of human life to the vested social and political powers… ” (Marcuse 1954)

Since German idealism was the philosophical underpinning of this political framework, and since Hegel’s philosophy subordinated the state to the right of reason asserted in the world history of mind, the National Socialists were furnished with the ideological motive for their philosophical orientation: the primacy of the state is substituted for the *Volksgemeinschaft*, the “national community”. For example, 

* Marcuse cites Alfred Rosenberg: “Today we view the State no longer as an independent idol before which men must kneel. The State is not even an end, but is only a means for preserving the people,” and “The authority of the Volkheit is above that of the State. He who does not admit this fact is an enemy of the people…”

* Marcuse cites Otto Dietrich: “The individual, so we teach today, has as such neither right nor the duty to exist, since all rights and all duties derive only from the community.”

The national community, far from the rational whole of Hegel’s state, subordinates the individual completely to a reality which is guided by no rational norms or values, but only by the mythos of “blood and soil.” Marcuse elaborates on this distinction:

> Hegel rejects any notion that ‘the people’ are an independent political factor, because, he maintains, political efficacy requires the consciousness of freedom … National Socialism, in contrast, glorifies the masses and retains the ‘people’ in their pre-rational, natural condition.

At first glance, it may seem odd to dismiss the fascist philosophy based on this lack of coherence; one may object that, for its own part, Marxist philosophy demands adaptation to the particularities of national culture, specific socioeconomic conditions, etc. But there is a key difference which we will now explain. We have already cited Sartre’s affirmation that, for us, truth is something that becomes, truth is a real epistemological and historical process which assembles all aspects of the object under examination. Marcuse writes that

> The dialectical pattern represents, and is thus ‘the truth of’, a world permeated by negativity, a world in which everything is something other than it really is, and in which opposition and contradiction constitute the laws of progress.

Thus the Marxist notion of truth lies in the negative totality of class society. Of course, this totality involves the dialectic between thought and action, between praxis and theory, as illustrated by Marx's famous statement in *The German Ideology*,

> The question whether objective truth can be attributed to human thinking is not a question of theory but is a practical question. Man must prove the truth – i.e. the reality and power, the this-sidedness of his thinking – in practice.

Hence, for Marx, the theory has already demonstrated the necessary steps, and formulated the final aims: “the abolition of labor, the employment of the socialized means of production for the free development of all individuals.” Indeed, the dialectic does insist that “Theory accompanies the practice at every moment analyzing the changing situation and formulating its concepts accordingly,” but even as the concrete conditions change, the Marxist truth “remains the same and theory remains its ultimate guardian.” Hence Marcuse concludes decisively that “practice follows the truth, not vice versa.”

On the contrary, the fascist has no absolute truth but action, and his philosophy demands the complete subsumption of thought to action. In G. Gentile’s words,

> Fascism draws out of the Mazzinian truth, thought and action, its most rigorous significance, identifying the two terms in order to have them perfectly coincide, no longer to attribute any value to thought that is not translated or expressed in action.

This conception of truth is developed further in *The Doctrine of Fascism*. The fascist Nation, "considered as an idea," becomes "the mightiest as the most ethical, the most coherent, the truest'' of ideas, because it seeks to express itself in the people "as the conscience and will of the few, if not of one." This assertion now reveals that the "truth” of fascist ideology is established to justify the dominant social reality: the fascist Nation is True because it expresses itself in the people, but this is really a false expression of the people insofar as it is merely an expression of the will of the State to which the people are completely subjugated, through which their conformity is manufactured.

Therefore, while the Marxist practice follows the truth guarded by theory, the truth established by the fascist doctrine follows the practice set in motion by the fascist state. The established truth conforms to and seeks the justification of the practice. Indeed, Paxton explains that “Only in 1932, after he had been in power for ten years, and when he wanted to “normalize” his regime, did Mussolini expound Fascist doctrine, in an article for the new Enciclopedia italiana. Power came first, then doctrine." Paxton concludes that “… the rightness of fascism does not depend on the truth of any of the propositions advanced in its name.” Rather, “Fascism is 'true' insofar as it helps fulfill the destiny of a chosen race or people or blood, locked with other peoples in a Darwinian struggle, and not in the light of some abstract and universal reason.”

So we are left with the following question: what, then, was the impact or significance of the intellectual work produced by fascists? How should we reconcile the philosophical project with the political project?

###<span style="color:#f05454"> Open questions</span> <a name="sixth"></a>

* List of open questions here

### <span style="color:#f05454">Bibliography</span> <a name="seventh"></a>

* *Lectures on the Philosophy of History*, GWF Hegel (1837)
* *The Doctrine of Fascism*, Benito Mussolini (1932)
* *The Spirit and Structure of German Fascism*, Robert Brady (1937)
* *Behemoth: The Structure and Practice of National Socialism*, Franz Neumann (1944)
* *Reason and Revolution*, Herbert Marcuse (1954)
* *Search for a Method*, Jean-Paul Sartre (1957)
* *Marxists in the Face of Fascism* (collection of works written by Marxists about fascism), edited by David Beetham (1983)
* *The Nature of Fascism*, Roger Griffin (1991)
* *Origins and Doctrine of Fascism* (collection of essays written by G. Gentile), edited by James Gregor (2002)
* *The Anatomy of Fascism*, Robert Paxton (2004)
* *Italian Fascism, 1915-1945*, Philip Morgan (2004)

### <span style="color:#f05454">Acknowledgements</span> <a name="eighth"></a>

* List of acknowledgements here